1. Nature. 2011 Jul 13;475(7355):S1. doi: 10.1038/475S1a.

Alzheimer's disease.

Brody H.

DOI: 10.1038/475S1a
PMID: 21760574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Lancet. 2021 Apr 24;397(10284):1577-1590. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32205-4. 
Epub 2021 Mar 2.

Alzheimer's disease.

Scheltens P(1), De Strooper B(2), Kivipelto M(3), Holstege H(4), Chételat G(5), 
Teunissen CE(6), Cummings J(7), van der Flier WM(8).

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands; Department of Neurology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands; Life Science Partners, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 
Electronic address: p.scheltens@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)VIB Center for Brain and Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium; KU Leuven 
Department for Neurology, Leuven, Belgium; Dementia Research Institute, 
University College London, London, UK.
(3)Division of Clinical Geriatrics and Center for Alzheimer Research, Department 
of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden; Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, University 
of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland; Ageing and Epidemiology Research Unit, 
School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(4)Alzheimer Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands; Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam University Medical 
Centers, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Normandie Université, Université de Caen, Institut National de la Santé et de 
la Recherche Médicale, Groupement d'Intérêt Public Cyceron, Caen, France.
(6)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(7)Chambers-Grundy Center for Transformative Neuroscience, Department of Brain 
Health, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV, USA; Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo 
Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(8)Alzheimer Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands; Department of Epidemiology and Datascience, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centers, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2021 Sep 4;398(10303):842.

In this Seminar, we highlight the main developments in the field of Alzheimer's 
disease. The most recent data indicate that, by 2050, the prevalence of dementia 
will double in Europe and triple worldwide, and that estimate is 3 times higher 
when based on a biological (rather than clinical) definition of Alzheimer's 
disease. The earliest phase of Alzheimer's disease (cellular phase) happens in 
parallel with accumulating amyloid β, inducing the spread of tau pathology. The 
risk of Alzheimer's disease is 60-80% dependent on heritable factors, with more 
than 40 Alzheimer's disease-associated genetic risk loci already identified, of 
which the APOE alleles have the strongest association with the disease. Novel 
biomarkers include PET scans and plasma assays for amyloid β and phosphorylated 
tau, which show great promise for clinical and research use. Multidomain 
lifestyle-based prevention trials suggest cognitive benefits in participants 
with increased risk of dementia. Lifestyle factors do not directly affect 
Alzheimer's disease pathology, but can still contribute to a positive outcome in 
individuals with Alzheimer's disease. Promising pharmacological treatments are 
poised at advanced stages of clinical trials and include anti-amyloid β, 
anti-tau, and anti-inflammatory strategies.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32205-4
PMCID: PMC8354300
PMID: 33667416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Handb Clin Neurol. 2019;167:231-255. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-804766-8.00013-3.

Alzheimer's disease.

Soria Lopez JA(1), González HM(1), Léger GC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, United States; Shiley-Marcos Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University 
of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, United States; Shiley-Marcos Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University 
of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States. Electronic address: 
gleger@ucsd.edu.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia refers to a particular onset and course of 
cognitive and functional decline associated with age together with a particular 
neuropathology. It was first described by Alois Alzheimer in 1906 about a 
patient whom he first encountered in 1901. Modern clinical diagnostic criteria 
have been developed, and criteria have also been proposed to recognize 
preclinical (or presymptomatic) stages of the disease with the use of 
biomarkers. The primary neuropathology was described by Alzheimer, and in the 
mid-1980s subsequently evolved into a more specific neuropathologic definition 
that recognizes the comorbid neuropathologies that frequently contribute to 
clinical dementia. Alzheimer's disease is now the most common form of 
neurodegenerative dementia in the United States with a disproportionate disease 
burden in minority populations. Deficits in the ability to encode and store new 
memories characterizes the initial stages of the disease. Subsequent progressive 
changes in cognition and behavior accompany the later stages. Changes in amyloid 
precursor protein (APP) cleavage and production of the APP fragment beta-amyloid 
(Aβ) along with hyperphosphorylated tau protein aggregation coalesce to cause 
reduction in synaptic strength, synaptic loss, and neurodegeneration. Metabolic, 
vascular, and inflammatory changes, as well as comorbid pathologies are key 
components of the disease process. Symptomatic treatment offers a modest, 
clinically measurable effect in cognition, but disease-modifying therapies are 
desperately needed.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-804766-8.00013-3
PMID: 31753135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. F1000Res. 2018 Jul 31;7:F1000 Faculty Rev-1161. doi: 
10.12688/f1000research.14506.1. eCollection 2018.

Current understanding of Alzheimer's disease diagnosis and treatment.

Weller J(1)(2), Budson A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston VA Hospital, 150 South Huntington Street, 
Jamaica Plain, MA, 02130, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, 72 East 
Concord Street C-309, Boston, MA, USA.

Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause of dementia worldwide, with the 
prevalence continuing to grow in part because of the aging world population. 
This neurodegenerative disease process is characterized classically by two 
hallmark pathologies: β-amyloid plaque deposition and neurofibrillary tangles of 
hyperphosphorylated tau. Diagnosis is based upon clinical presentation 
fulfilling several criteria as well as fluid and imaging biomarkers. Treatment 
is currently targeted toward symptomatic therapy, although trials are underway 
that aim to reduce the production and overall burden of pathology within the 
brain. Here, we discuss recent advances in our understanding of the clinical 
evaluation and treatment of Alzheimer's disease, with updates regarding clinical 
trials still in progress.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.14506.1
PMCID: PMC6073093
PMID: 30135715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Jason Weller has no 
competing interests to declare. Andrew Budson is a consultant and speaker for 
General Electric, Lilly, and Axovant and is a clinical trial investigator for 
Biogen, Lilly, vTv therapeutics, and Axovant.No competing interests were 
disclosed.No competing interests were disclosed.


5. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jan 5;24(2):1059. doi: 10.3390/ijms24021059.

Alzheimer's Disease-Biochemical and Psychological Background for Diagnosis and 
Treatment.

Beata BK(1), Wojciech J(2), Johannes K(3), Piotr L(3), Barbara M(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital of Bialystok, 15-269 Bialystok, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Biochemical Diagnostics, Medical University of Bialystok, 
15-269 Bialystok, Poland.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, UniversitätsKlinikum Erlangen and 
Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91-054 Erlangen, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurodegeneration Diagnostics, Medical University of Bialystok, 
15-269 Bialystok, Poland.

There is a paucity of empirical research on the use of non-pharmacological 
interventions to both treat and curb the spread of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
across the globe. This paper examines the biochemical and clinical outlook and 
the social implications of the condition in relation to psychological aspects 
that may indicate a direction for further interventions. There is a scarcity of 
research on the effectiveness of using various psychological aspects of AD, a 
disease characterized by a process of transition from health and independence to 
a dependent state with a progressive loss of memory and functional skills. The 
paper investigates the biochemical and psychological aspects of AD and their 
significance for improving quality of life for patients with this disease. 
Psychological interventions based on, among other factors, biochemical studies, 
are conducted to improve the emotional wellbeing of AD patients and may assist 
in slowing down the progression of the disease. To date, however, no effective 
methods of AD treatment have been established.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24021059
PMCID: PMC9866942
PMID: 36674580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interest or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


6. Curr Aging Sci. 2022;15(1):2-25. doi: 10.2174/1874609814666210302085232.

Alzheimer's Disease: Pathogenesis and Therapeutic Interventions.

Ogbodo JO(1), Agbo CP(2), Njoku UO(3), Ogugofor MO(3), Egba SI(4), Ihim SA(5), 
Echezona AC(2), Brendan KC(6), Upaganlawar AB(7), Upasani CD(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Science Laboratory Technology, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, 
Nigeria.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Michael Okpara University of Agriculture, 
Umudike, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, 
Nigeria.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Spiritan University, Nneochi, Nigeria.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, Sureshdada Shriman\'s College of Pharmacy, New 
Dehli, India.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia. 
Genetics, excessive exposure to environmental pollutants, as well as unhealthy 
lifestyle practices are often linked to the development of AD. No therapeutic 
approach has achieved complete success in treating AD; however, early detection 
and management with appropriate drugs are key to improving prognosis.
INTERVENTIONS: The pathogenesis of AD was extensively discussed in order to 
understand the reasons for the interventions suggested. The interventions 
reviewed include the use of different therapeutic agents and approaches, gene 
therapy, adherence to healthy dietary plans (Mediterranean diet, Okinawan diet 
and MIND diet), as well as the use of medicinal plants. The potential of 
nanotechnology as a multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary approach in the 
design of nano-formulations of AD drugs and the use of Superparamagnetic Iron 
Oxide Nanoparticles (SPIONs) as theranostic tools for early detection of 
Alzheimer's disease were also discussed.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1874609814666210302085232
PMID: 33653258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Mar 30;24(7):6518. doi: 10.3390/ijms24076518.

Inflammatory Processes in Alzheimer's Disease-Pathomechanism, Diagnosis and 
Treatment: A Review.

Twarowski B(1), Herbet M(1).

Author information:
(1)Chair and Department of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University 
of Lublin, Jaczewskiego 8b Street, 20-090 Lublin, Poland.

Alzheimer's disease is one of the most commonly diagnosed cases of senile 
dementia in the world. It is an incurable process, most often leading to death. 
This disease is multifactorial, and one factor of this is inflammation. Numerous 
mediators secreted by inflammatory cells can cause neuronal degeneration. 
Neuritis may coexist with other mechanisms of Alzheimer's disease, contributing 
to disease progression, and may also directly underlie AD. Although much has 
been established about the inflammatory processes in the pathogenesis of AD, 
many aspects remain unexplained. The work is devoted in particular to the 
pathomechanism of inflammation and its role in diagnosis and treatment. An 
in-depth and detailed understanding of the pathomechanism of neuroinflammation 
in Alzheimer's disease may help in the development of diagnostic methods for 
early diagnosis and may contribute to the development of new therapeutic 
strategies for the disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24076518
PMCID: PMC10095343
PMID: 37047492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


8. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2017 Oct;23(9-10):818-831. doi: 
10.1017/S135561771700100X.

Alzheimer's Disease: Past, Present, and Future.

Bondi MW(1), Edmonds EC(1), Salmon DP(2).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Psychiatry,University of California San Diego,School of 
Medicine,La Jolla,California.
(2)3Department of Neurosciences,University of California San Diego,School of 
Medicine,La Jolla,California.

Although dementia has been described in ancient texts over many centuries (e.g., 
"Be kind to your father, even if his mind fail him." - Old Testament: Sirach 
3:12), our knowledge of its underlying causes is little more than a century old. 
Alzheimer published his now famous case study only 110 years ago, and our modern 
understanding of the disease that bears his name, and its neuropsychological 
consequences, really only began to accelerate in the 1980s. Since then we have 
witnessed an explosion of basic and translational research into the causes, 
characterizations, and possible treatments for Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
other dementias. We review this lineage of work beginning with Alzheimer's own 
writings and drawings, then jump to the modern era beginning in the 1970s and 
early 1980s and provide a sampling of neuropsychological and other contextual 
work from each ensuing decade. During the 1980s our field began its foundational 
studies of profiling the neuropsychological deficits associated with AD and its 
differentiation from other dementias (e.g., cortical vs. subcortical dementias). 
The 1990s continued these efforts and began to identify the specific cognitive 
mechanisms affected by various neuropathologic substrates. The 2000s ushered in 
a focus on the study of prodromal stages of neurodegenerative disease before the 
full-blown dementia syndrome (i.e., mild cognitive impairment). The current 
decade has seen the rise of imaging and other biomarkers to characterize 
preclinical disease before the development of significant cognitive decline. 
Finally, we suggest future directions and predictions for dementia-related 
research and potential therapeutic interventions. (JINS, 2017, 23, 818-831).

DOI: 10.1017/S135561771700100X
PMCID: PMC5830188
PMID: 29198280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Clin Med (Lond). 2016 Jun;16(3):247-53. doi: 10.7861/clinmedicine.16-3-247.

Drug treatments in Alzheimer's disease.

Briggs R(1), Kennelly SP(1), O'Neill D(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ageing, Neuroscience and the Humanities, Trinity Centre for Health 
Sciences, Tallaght Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

Despite the significant public health issue that it poses, only five medical 
treatments have been approved for Alzheimer's disease (AD) and these act to 
control symptoms rather than alter the course of the disease. Studies of 
potential disease-modifying therapy have generally been undertaken in patients 
with clinically detectable disease, yet evidence suggests that the pathological 
changes associated with AD begin several years before this. It is possible that 
pharmacological therapy may be beneficial in this pre-clinical stage before the 
neurodegenerative process is established. Techniques providing earlier 
diagnosis, such as cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and amyloid positron emission 
tomography neuroimaging, are key to testing this theory in clinical trials. 
Recent results from trials of agents such as aducanumab are encouraging but must 
also be interpreted with caution. Such medicines could potentially delay the 
onset of dementia and would therefore markedly reduce its prevalence. However, 
we currently remain a good distance away from clinically available 
disease-modifying therapy.

© 2016 Royal College of Physicians.

DOI: 10.7861/clinmedicine.16-3-247
PMCID: PMC5922703
PMID: 27251914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Semin Neurol. 2013 Sep;33(4):313-29. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1359319. Epub 2013 Nov 
14.

Alzheimer's disease.

Oboudiyat C(1), Glazer H, Seifan A, Greer C, Isaacson RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, Florida.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative cause of dementia 
and is responsible for significant individual morbidity and mortality, and 
economic impact on the health care system. Neurodegeneration (including neuronal 
atrophy and/or loss) are attributed to extraneuronal toxic amyloid oligomers and 
proteins, intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles consisting of 
hyperphosphorylated tau, region-specific diminished cerebral glucose metabolism, 
synaptic dysfunction, and mitochondrial dysfunction. Several of these pathologic 
changes may occur decades before symptom onset, leaving ample time for 
implementing prevention strategies that target the earliest stages of the 
disease. In recent years, a myriad of modifiable and nonmodifiable risk factors 
have been elucidated. We describe the latest criteria for the diagnosis of AD, 
including earliest diagnostic stage of preclinical AD, which has the highest 
potential for research, including diagnosis and disease modification. We discuss 
both FDA-approved pharmacologic treatments, as well as nonpharmacologic 
strategies for AD therapeutics, including prevention via evidence-based, 
low-risk interventions. Genotype is an important consideration in managing 
patients on the AD continuum, as presence of the APOE ε4 allele may influence 
response to treatment. We present the most current evidence relating to 
pharmacogenomics, nutrigenomics, and distinctive nutritional requirements 
targeted toward AD.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1359319
PMID: 24234352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]